3. Submissions by Mr Friedman KC
================================

**Mr Friedman**: Good afternoon, my Lady.   We appear, as you know, for two disabled people's organisations, Inclusion Scotland and Disability Rights UK, who were made Core Participants by you since the previous preliminary hearing. Can I thank Mr Dawson KC and his team for the contact that was made beforehand and the presentation today.     At the Module 2 hearing on 1 March you spoke of the unique features of this Inquiry, with its statutory powers, its broad terms of reference and its Core Participants playing important roles. To that, we would add what brings us together for this hearing.     The Inquiry has chosen to dedicate specific modules to learning from the discrete approaches to governing Covid across the four nations of the UK.     The rationale for that is understandable. While the union may be devolved politically and administratively, the pandemic knew no boundaries, and especially so on the island of Britain.      That is specifically pertinent to disabled people in Scotland, who make up 32% of adults and 10% of children.     They were differentially affected by Covid-19 in three main areas.   There was: (1) increased risk of poor outcomes from the disease itself; (2) reduced access to routine healthcare and rehabilitation; and (3) the adverse impacts of the non-pharmaceutical intervention.

The disabled people's organisations anticipate from the terms of reference that the Inquiry will examine the full size, extent and cause of those differentials as they applied to Scotland, and the political and administrative decision making in Scotland as compared to the rest of the United Kingdom. Be all that as it may, my Lady, we appreciate that these devolved power modules are special and some of the external understanding of this Inquiry might not yet have realised why.   Although various investigations have taken place in Scotland and the other nations, and there will be the discrete statutory Inquiry for this one to coordinate with, it is important to acknowledge and reflect on the importance to the fact that no such four-nation independent and impartial investigation of political and administrative decision making has happened in the 25 years of devolution.   How might that unique feature particularly apply to our clients for a module that, as Mr Dawson valuably puts it, takes place in Scotland, with Scotland and for Scotland?

As you know, the disabled people's organisations press for an analytical approach to this disaster informed by human rights, that uses human rights not just as a body of laws that lawyers argue over, but as a set of tools designed to help understanding and deepen societal connection.

Having supplied you with the general nation-wide documents for the Module 2 hearing, we have now supplied you with our Module 2A written submissions, what we think are the relevant Scottish government main NGO documents that focus on what our clients suggest are the pertinent issues immediately before and during the pandemic.   We do that not because my Lady, or your team, have finalised your witnesses for the hearing, that was clear beforehand and it's been made very clear today, but we do it precisely because it has not yet been done. The time is short, the endeavour is wide and intense, and our clients want the lens through which disabled people lived and died from Covid to become one of my Lady's many lenses. When you and your team make preliminary decisions about process and move forward, we therefore offer the following observations that can be summarised briefly.

A focus on the human rights of disabled people and human accounting of the variety of humanity, talent and value that they represent is a stalled work in progress in each of the four nations.

That stalling arises for multiple reasons that you will need to return to, but for present purposes you will see that both recognition of disabled people's value, and a redistribution and restructuring of society and economics to remove their exclusion, extends to policy and law in Scotland, and you will see in Wales as well, somewhat more than it does in England and Northern Ireland. In Scotland we identify four discrete administrative aspects relating to disability rights that may or may not have made differences in Module 2A decision making, but if they did not we would like you to consider how they could or should have done both for Scotland but also elsewhere. Firstly, unlike in England, the Scottish government in 2016 produced a delivery plan for achieving better compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.     Amongst other things, it formally adopts the social model approach to understanding disability as something caused by people's treatment by society rather than being inherent in their condition.    That does not mean that the challenges of individual impairment are overlooked, but the social model is the main lens.

Secondly, and further to the submissions the Inquiry has actively been considering these past weeks, you can see that structural discrimination is taken as a given at the level of Scottish government policy and the exception to this existence acts as the starting point for change.   Likewise.   Intersectional understanding is accepted as a necessary discipline by the Scottish government. Thirdly, Scotland has since 2018 brought into force the public sector duty regarding socio-economic inequalities contained in section 1 of the Equality Act 2010.   It requires public bodies including, for Module 2A purposes, ministers, when making decisions of a strategic nature about how to exercise their functions, to have due regard to the desirability of exercising them in way that is designed to reduce the inequalities of outcome which result from socio-economic disadvantage. The equivalent of that duty was brought into force in Wales in March 2021.    It is not in force in England or Northern Ireland. Fourthly, and we submit inescapably, the human rights culture of the Scottish government and the UK government has not been the same.   Before Covid, the UK government had placed a bill of rights before the Westminster Parliament that proposes to scale down positive duties to protect human rights as provided for under the Human Rights Act and the case law of the European Court of Human Rights.

The Scottish government, within the confines of its devolved powers, propose to add to the current Human Rights Act and currently adopts a human rights approach summarised under the acronym PANEL, which covers the principles of participation, accountability, non-discrimination and equality, empowerment and legality.

The human rights outcome, enshrined under the Scottish National Performance Framework, that the devolved government wants itself to be judged by, includes the aim to "provide the care people need with love, understanding and dignity while developing robust, independent means for people to hold government to account and encourage an active interest in politics and civic life".

Nevertheless, my Lady, Inclusion Scotland have criticised gaps between Scottish government rhetoric and conduct during the pandemic.   Matters that are likely to be significant include lack of planning, failure to work directly with disabled people to construct interventions with their situation fully in mind, and critical gaps in the data.

Moreover, although the Scottish government may have taken some steps to mitigate the consequences of austerity policies before 2020, the standard and capacity of independent living for disabled people in Scotland was still that much less resilient when the pandemic emergency measures came into force.

That provides the DPO's suggested context and perspectives for the next stage of Inquiry preparation. We understand that the commissioned expert reporting will assist you to evaluate how much the four nations properly operated an all-Britain pandemic response, as well as how each administration catered to their local populations as required by the respective democratic and legal frameworks.

On this, we respectfully ask you to consider, as he then was, Sir Nicholas Phillips' report on BSE, published in 2000.   At first blush this seems to be another public inquiry of past years that was lost to government memory too soon after it reported and was not sufficiently in the forefront of minds when the pandemic began.   We say that because a recommendation of the BSE report, particularly relevant to this module, was to ensure that as then forthcoming devolution did not compromise a sufficiently synchronised response to a UK-wide risk.

Insofar as the Inquiry will want to understand whether the Scottish Covid-19 Advisory Group that advised its government bore a different make-up and personality to its SAGE counterpart, the Inquiry will see that the House of Commons' report on the subject saw that both of them lacked sufficient expertise in service provision. Neither of them seemed to have complied with the disability rights principles that policies affecting disabled people should be co-produced and co-designed with disabled people. We have considered my Lady's Module 2 ruling of 9 March 2023 that, in addition to the expert evidence to be obtained in relation to structural racism, the Inquiry will explore the possibility of obtaining a single report covering other issues, if necessary drafted by a small team of experts covering different specialisms. In response to that ruling, that the DPO welcome, we would add the following: first, the competency of the team of experts should include those with appreciation of structural discrimination as it is accepted to apply to disabled people both by the protection under the Equality Act 2010 that is afforded to them, also the terms of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of [People] with Disabilities, but also and further, in the instance of Module 2A, because of Scottish government policy to do so.

Second, the DPO stance remains that these issues as they applies to disabled people directly as well as intersectionally, should be examined by a fourfold cumulative approach of asking: (1) them and other witnesses about it; (2) doing the same with the presently instructed experts, even to establish what they don't know; (3) raising disability-related issues with the relevant parts of the team of specialists to be assembled; but also (4) to take into account the core sources on the subject, especially as they influenced UK and devolved government policies immediately prior to and during the pandemic.

On selecting and questioning of witnesses we make two points at this stage.   First, consider calling witnesses from the organisations of disabled people's groups, including Inclusion Scotland, because they were involved in trying to respond to the pandemic in real time.

Second, we recognise that the Inquiry is determined to consult along the way, but the final preparation for these hearings could be tight and the time proposed for the actual hearings is relatively short.    For these reasons, early consultations both ways are so welcomed in the way it has been presented today, including through Core Participants directing the Inquiry's attention to key issues and documents, is going to be important, and it is better to do it as soon as possible. Finally, my Lady, on reasonable adjustments for Inquiry hearings.   You will have well in mind the various suggestions that have been made and we appreciate this now has to be resolved systematically. Can I reiterate that the absence of a British sign language interpreter on the screen during hearings adversely impacts on their public nature. For those people, deaf people who use subtitles, the algorithm-based text on the YouTube channel is not accurate.   The transcripts and the video of the hearings is still taking some time to publish on the Inquiry website, although we appreciate that is being worked on. But going forward, especially for the substantive hearings, there is a sizeable section of the deaf population who do not necessarily read subtitles or transcripts and/or, importantly, do not identify with written text as a mode of communication.

That is also an issue which arises in relation to the listening project.   How will those who communicate through British and/or International Sign Language be listened to or, to use my Lady's words, make their story matter?

You will see that when we use the capital D for "Deaf" in this request, it is used as a cultural label and refers to people who are profoundly deaf, whose first or only language is sign language and a part of a cultural and linguistic minority known as the Deaf community.   In other words, you are being asked to provide an interpreter and the ability to participate for that part of the UK population.

My Lady, those are our submissions.

**Baroness Hallett**: Thank you very much indeed, Mr Friedman. You make some very important and valid points, and I undertake to ensure they are all very much considered and all that you have said will be taken into account. So I'm very grateful to you.

**Mr Friedman**: Thank you, my Lady.

**Baroness Hallett**: Ms Gallagher.

